Many projections put India within the
top three leading economies in the world
after China and the United States. So
they see a potential to be recognized as
a great power. However, [music] they
look around the world and they see that
they're not getting that respect.
In 2026, the great power [music] with
the largest population and the fastest
growing economy isn't [music] China.
It's India. India is now poised to
become the third largest economy of the
world.
>> India's first quarter GDP growth has
[music] come in far higher than
expected. The IMF has upgraded India's
growth forecast. [music]
>> And while China and the US are locked in
a battle for global dominance, India is
busy making deals with Europe.
>> We are creating a market of two billion
people
>> with Donald Trump.
>> Not to be outdone, Donald Trump
announces his own trade agreement with
New Delhi. with Vladimir Putin's Russia.
My guest [music] this week has spent his
career writing about international
relations and South Asia and I wanted to
ask him if there might [music] be an
Indian century that's waiting to be
born. Amitav Acharia [music] welcome to
interesting times.
>> Thank you very much. I'm glad to be
here.
>> I'm glad to have you. So I want to talk
today about two big related subjects
which are India as a great power in its
own right and also the impact of the
Indian diaspora of India on the move on
the entire world. But I thought we could
start with the story of the last 25
years that I think a lot of Americans
who think about the world and great
power competition have in their minds
which is a story where both India and
China have modernized have developed
have grown but China has had the faster
path. China has sort of roared to global
prominence and India has taken a slower
path. So could you just talk about
India's path to development and power
just over the last couple decades and
what that looks like?
>> I think you're absolutely right uh that
India's path uh to economic development
even uh strategic uh role is uh slower
to evolve but uh let's not forget
history. India was actually uh a major
power and India actually had a much
bigger imprint on at least on Asian uh
international relations in the 1940s and
50s where uh China was uh just getting
settled into its communist uh uh
government but then uh India and China
almost went parallel in terms of
development um but then [clears throat]
China took off. So um there is always
this India China story narrative
comparing these two and uh economically
China has done very well reduced poverty
a lot more than India but India hasn't
done that badly the last few years it's
actually growth rates are higher than
China and uh but it started on a lower
base and India has maintained its uh
open political system uh democracy and
uh despite some hiccups and problems The
main problem with India has been
generating employment and uh and that's
what this is this is a challenge for the
current government but I think if uh if
uh the Indians can taking advantage of
the trade agreements for example uh
having more access to the European
market which they never had before and
reconciling with the United States and
having uh fair fairly good trade deal
for India I think that India that can
overcome uh the crisis of the global
economy and also in some ways become a
little more self-reliant. Uh I think
that that'll be the best case scenario.
>> Talk about demographics. This is a a
frequent obsession on this show. But one
of the striking things about the Chinese
position right now is that China's birth
rate has collapsed. Whereas India while
its birth rate has declined is entering
into what often gets called sort of the
demographic dividend sweet spot. You
know the period when you have a large
young population and you don't have a
large older population to support which
is going to be China's big big problem.
Why does India have a demographic
advantage over China right now?
>> Because China of course now is paying
the price of a very strict and a one
child policy. India never had the one
child policy. So India has more young
population coming up but uh there can be
a mixed blessing because you have to
find jobs for these people satisfy these
people. If India has to improve its
educational infrastructure and
employment possibility that's not a
given but India is more open to
integration into the global markets now
uh so with that you know trade deal with
Europe nobody would have thought that's
possible. So I think if India can
integrate itself more into the supply
chain and it can never be like factory
of the world like China is but in terms
of a combination of services technology
and manufacturing combined package India
can do quite well just describe describe
the trade deal that India has just made
with Europe because it's really quite
distinctive and you know the I think the
European leader Ursula Vanderlayan
described it as the mother of all trade
deals which is not normal European lingo
and it has to do with opening markets.
It has to do with opening migration.
It's going to allow probably for more
Indian migration into Europe. But what
does this mean for India and the world?
>> I think it's a it's a godsend blessing
for Europe at the right time when
they're facing all this tariffs and
threats from the United States. U
because Europe both India and European
Union on the receiving end of Trump for
Indians is a bit of a surprise. I mean
in the in the long term because India
has been very protectionist but I think
uh it opens up Indian exports a lot more
creates a new market as it at a time
when American market is uh uh shrinking
uh for Indians uh and uh so uh European
Union doesn't have 19% or 18% tariffs on
Indian exports Indian exporters will be
very happy to have that and also there
will be more
>> [clears throat]
>> uh uh investment with the European Union
when it has the trade deal it will be
more investment coming into India as
well. It's a great opportunity for India
and it's very timely but politically
also
>> and more migration right and more right
which which gives you potentially the
sweet spot right where India
has this potential demographic dividend
but as you said India also has
unemployment problems but if you can
have more migration to Europe maybe the
unemployment problems are not as big
>> and especially especially when the
migration of Indians to the United
States is under question because of all
this restrictions of um you know H1B but
that's only one you know all all over
restriction on migration yes so we're
talking in a context where
the Indian government has just
negotiated successive trade deals you
know there's been a deal of some kind
with Donald Trump with the United States
but in terms of Indian companies and
Indian products what you know if you're
in Europe or if you're in the United
States right like you have probably more
of a sense of Chinese East Asian
companies as exporters as people you buy
from. What what are the companies in
India? What are the industries where you
would imagine a more open India ends up
having more of an imprint on the west?
>> When it comes to Europe, I think it will
be uh agricultural products, textiles
and uh
manufact mechanical goods. uh but I
think al ultimately we will see India
moving up the supply chain and just like
China did and also uh provide Europe
with a whole range of products. It could
be minerals but I think the to me the
India EU deal is a very political thing.
I mean the import significance is more
political than economic. Suddenly you
have the psychological effect of
creating such a large market between in
the European Union is a considerable
economic power and there is India. So
there would be uh of course uh uh a
further evolution but I think basically
India is going to import more high
technology things from Europe especially
aircraft and uh they're already
importing automobiles. India has been
actually investing in uh say iron and
steel for example uh in Europe and uh
the French have invested in India in
aluminium. Uh but I think this will be
more of a resource come industrial mix
rather than a very high techch or purely
agricultural resource uh export from
India to the to Europe. So it seems like
India has a substantial distance to go
to get to anything like the point where
China is in terms of being an industrial
powerhouse shipping things to the rest
of the world. But maybe India's strength
lies as sort of a center of power for
groups that don't want to be dominated
either by China or or the United States.
>> Yeah, I agree. But I just keep in mind,
let's keep in mind that China was not
always like that. A lot of the exports
from China to the rest of the world were
actually in terms of uh products that
were built with technology that was
borrowed from outside. Uh so so for
example, China can now export uh fast
trains, but originally it got the
technology from uh Germany and and
Japan. So what I'm talking about is that
India could also do the same thing. So
one of the problems of uh Indian economy
that it has not been integrated well
into the global supply chain because of
the protectionism. There is a political
uh argument ideological argument in
India about having big corporations uh
foreign corporations but Europeans may
be more acceptable now than American
corporations. Now it has a chance to
have more investment then use that to
move up the supply chain and move up the
industrial scale also in the services
sector which India is very very
wellendowed uh in especially high
technology services sector so this is an
opportunity India is not going to have
the kind of industrial revolution like
China had that stage has passed it's not
going to become the factory of the world
uh like China has be become that's
that's that that window has closed but
the next stage of economic development
combination of industrial high
technology services as India had to find
that niche and still move up from
exporting raw materials or textiles uh
and and and the like
>> what tell me about India's relationship
with Russia
>> very close um the people uh in uh
especially in the United States don't
understand it uh but uh it's it goes
back to Uh certainly I would say the 70s
um [clears throat] when the United
States and India uh after having a
fairly good start uh actually went to
different camps. So US uh uh supported
Pakistan and India had to look to Russia
for help. The 1971 India Pakistan war of
Bangladesh was a turning point where
Nixon and Kissinger deployed the seventh
fleet in the Bay of Bengal and India had
to conclude a defense treaty with the
Soviet Union. So that memory remains and
Soviet Union uh now of course Russia
became uh the largest supplier of
defense equipment to India. So the
Russians have been fairly reliable and
fairly uh friendly uh uh partners with
with India uh for a very long time. So
so there is a therefore historical
memory there is a actually in some ways
sentimental I would say I grew up in
India uh during the Soviet Union and I
have seen felt that uh the view Indian
view of the Soviet Union was nothing
like the western view. was seen as
friendly, much more benign than many of
the former colonial powers or the United
States. So that remains now. So how does
that how does that translate into the
Putin era that
>> okay the Putin era India has continued
because it's dependent on Russia for
weapons but then the new element of
energy dependence um because uh India
did not actually import a lot of oil
from Russia until the Ukraine war most
of the Indian supply of oil came from uh
the Middle East but then when the
Ukraine war and Russia started um
selling discount counted oil. So India
become heavily reliant on uh Russian
oil. But that that's not a permanent uh
that can change. I think there is also
the uh you know India of course now
under the Modi government moved much
closer to the US than any previous
government had been and they invested a
lot on this relationship. Um I have
talked to Indian leaders and they said
this is the best relationship we have
with the US in a long time. United
States accepted uh India's nuclear power
status which is a big this is not Trump
it started with you know George Woo
George Bus is hugely popular in India uh
so because of the change of policy so
with that relations with Russia were not
as special as they could have been so
India as you know is a non-aligned or
multi-aligned uh country in terms of
foreign policy so India felt that could
maintain good relations with traditional
uh uh partner the Russians continue to
get weapons. India wanted to maintain
that relationship diplomatic support
from Russia but at the same time
cultivate closer relations with US. So
you can say it's multi-alignment you can
say it's playing both ways having your
cake and eat it too.
>> And can and how long can you do that? I
mean I'm I'm interested particularly so
on the one hand obviously there's the
challenge of managing [clears throat] a
relationship with the United States when
the US is um supporting Ukraine in its
conflict with Russia and when Russia
seems aligned with China against the US
but then even if that shakes up a bit as
it has under Trump right so then India
decides to sort of move into closer
alignment with Europe but Europe is you
know Europe is at war [laughter] with
Putin Right. Is there basically I'm
asking is there a way for India to sort
of have a kind of sustainable
you know non-American non-Chinese block
or is it always just going to be lean
towards Russia one moment lean towards
the EU the next? That's a that's a good
question. I mean first of all the Indian
policy has always been not to depend too
much on one country or align with one
power. So it was non-aligned. Now it's a
multi-line
>> multi-igned right.
>> Uh so I think the rationale for that is
very clear that uh you don't have to
choose sides like you can have some uh
benefits by having that kind of a
balanced relationship. But that policy
would work as long as the United States
say that okay it's either you're with us
or you're against us. uh it's only under
the second Trump too that US started uh
think that you you have to choose u and
this is about right this has been mostly
about energy right saying you need to
stop buying
>> from from Russia
>> yeah mostly about energy but I think
there is also uh even under uh uh the
Biden administration there was a kind of
thing that India was playing both ways
there was always the feeling of unease
about this Indian voting in the United
Nations uh against the United States
India's position in uh things like
Ukraine uh where India abstained. Uh so
uh I have always argued in my some of my
writings that you cannot have uh uh
sustain this for too long. At some point
there will be a tension and then you
have to choose or you will get into um
problems and that's exactly what has
happened. Um but at the same time the
European Union is a relatively new
thing. Uh so they're moving so close to
the European Union as a group. This is a
very rulesbound and very uh conservative
beast.
>> The Europeans like rules. They really
do.
>> And and and they also have human rights.
They have democracy. You know, I can
tell you this. I work with some NOS's in
India and uh many of them get grants
from the European Union based like
German foundations and there the the
rules are now so strict that you have to
everything has to be linked to human
rights and democracy and some of the
foundations have closed their offices in
India moved to Nepal and other places.
So I think the Indians don't like that
but I think it's a smart deal. So the
bottom line is that there's no reason
why India cannot have good relations
with multiple powers. But when one of
these big powers is saying that you have
to choose then it becomes complicated.
>> What strategically?
>> Yeah.
>> What does India want? Is this just a
matter of we're not one of the
superpowers. we're just trying to play
the best hand we can or is are there a
set of sort of you know geopolitical
objectives right that that India is
interested in I think again Americans
are accustomed to the idea that
>> China you know China wants Taiwan China
you know China wants a certain kind of
dominance in East Asia China has you
know some client states in Africa
there's sort of a sense of like Chinese
grand strategy what is what is Indian
grand strategy
>> you know there is a there is an argument
that India doesn't have a grand
strategy. I don't believe in that. But
let me say Indians don't uh want to be a
superpower
in the same sense as China. I mean this
disc I have lived in China actually much
longer in the last 20 years than I have
lived in India. And in China there's an
obsession of being number one. Uh they
won't say they won't admit it but they
United States compete with the United
States overtake the United States. They
have all sorts of studies looking at the
relative power of nations. India has
very little of that. India just want to
have status and the key word is status
as a great power. [snorts] Status as uh
respect in the international community
the what uh what it used to have and I
think that uh means a little more kind
of realistic view of what India can do.
uh but on the other hand some Indians
see their economy growing I mean
overtaken its former colonial master
Britain [snorts] and they see India u
large country number one uh in terms of
population uh many projections put India
within the top uh you know at least
three uh leading economies in the world
after United States and China or China
and the United States so they see a
potential to be recognized as a great
power they look around the world and
they see that they're not getting that
respect and uh because everybody's
obsessed with China, everybody's
obsessed with yeah at the moment it's
China is the name of the game. Indians
you can say there is a complex here I
won't say inferiority complex but a
sense that they are not getting the fair
recognition that they deserve and that's
what they want and they thought they
were on the way to get this then
President Trump's tariffs uh India
getting until now 50% uh is a big insult
but shouldn't they take it as a
compliment Trump wanted to put those
tariffs on China too right it's a sign
no I'm I'm I'm I'm joking obviously but
Um but it is you know in its own way the
scale of the tariffs that Trump wants to
impose on you should not necessarily be
taken as an insult.
>> Well I think it's not China it's
Pakistan. Pakistan got uh 19%.
Uh and Pakistan gets a visit to the
white house and uh India got 50. Um so
now of course it's the other way around.
India got 18% and Pakistan is a very
unhappy. So let's talk about then two
two concrete expressions of Indian power
right the relationship with Pakistan and
the relationship with China. Let's say
we're living through a 15 to 20 year
period where India's influence and power
are going to increase. What does success
for India look like with its less
powerful but nuclear armed rival
Pakistan and its more powerful neighbor
China? I think I mean this depends on
who you ask the foreign policy.
>> I'm asking you I'm asking you.
>> My sense is that for India if India can
achieve the kind of growth and become
the third largest economy not
necessarily overtaking China but
maintain its political system openness
and have more diplomatic influence. Uh I
think that will be quite acceptable to
India. India is not a revisionist power.
India is a status quo power. I think
that's what success would mean and and
domestically at home generate more
employment but you cannot have a third
largest economy without having a
sustainable employment and industrial
base with Pakistan terrorism I mean
there is of course the Kashmir and other
issues but it's all linked to from the
from the Indian perspective support for
terrorism and and they see that uh they
see the west not really understanding
India's position and then China's
support for Pakist Pakistan. China is
the biggest you know they say uh
ironcloud relationship with Pakistan and
they see that Pakistan would not be uh
as adventurous as uh uh sort of a
assertive bi India without Chinese help.
That's what gets Indians angry about
China. uh otherwise I don't think there
is any uh totally like in uh
unresolvable uh or a kind of a a sort of
dimension that cannot be diplomatically
addressed uh between India and China
>> and what changes the the situation for
the better for India. Is it just
economic growth or is it
>> is there a kind of level of military
power where India thinks that it could
get Pakistan isolated and sort of force
China to be friendlier?
>> I think nuclear weapons are play a big
role here. I mean in so Pakistan has
nuclear weapons and uh but China is also
much bigger nuclear power. For a while
Indian foreign policy moved in the
direction of ignoring Pakistan and uh
you know and engaging China. So it's a
China they have to deal with. China is
the true sort of peer competitor rather
than Pakistan.
>> How strong is India's military apart
from nuclear questions? You mentioned
obviously it's still it's importing
weapons from Russia, importing weapons
from the United States like how
significant a global force is the Indian
military potentially
>> I think depends on the uh location. So
if it comes to the Indian Ocean u which
is India's backyard Indian capabilities
are very significant. So then um in
terms of uh the global power projection
I don't think India has the capability.
[clears throat]
So I think India focuses on the Indian
Ocean uh and you know the Chinese of
course building a bluewater navy and
they want to go into the Indian Ocean.
are already in the Indian Ocean and
India feels that it can act as a
deterrent or counter to Chinese
expansion in the Indian Ocean and that
the in Indian strategic thinking is a
kind [clears throat] of helpful to the
west. So Indian strategic doctrine
focuses a long range nuclear capability
in the Indian Ocean power projection
within the Indian Ocean.
>> Let's I I want to move to culture but
let's try and make a a bridge between
geopolitics and culture. So Narendra
Modi the Modi government has been in
power for some time now. You know the
Modi government is
>> nationalist Hindu nationalist. It has a
particular conception of Indian
civilization
rooted in Hindu religion, Hindu identity
and so on. Is there a kind of cultural
geopolitics where Indian nationalists
imagine themselves as sort of dominant
in a kind of civilizational space where
like all of South Asia is shaped by its
hinduta the sort of religious ideology
or political religious ideology.
>> Yeah. So that uh that's a very good
question and uh certainly uh under the
current ruling party um or BJP Modi's
party the BJP's ideology is based on
Hindu nationalism Hindu but I think uh
you can say that uh some of the policies
of domestic politics of India has moved
in that direction and it is creating a
lot of concern among the Muslims among
the secular forces in India which is
still very substantial.
And uh I at the same time um the
civilizational narrative you're talking
about that India is the one of the great
civilizations. There's a big debate in
India about whether Indian civilization
was born in India and went overseas uh
influenced the whole world. Yes.
>> Or whether Indian civilization actually
is kind of a hybrid. there was a
pre-existing civilization in indust
valley and then we had migration from uh
the pontic steps to central Asia Persia
and it's kind of become a hybrid
civilization that's the view I I take uh
but uh that's not the view of some of
the key members of the ruling elite
ruling party in India and that creates
aggravation and fear uh among the
neighbors but also within India among
the secular forces which are still quite
substantial
>> well and that's so that's the idea A
that Indian civilization is something
that's born in India and then spreads
around the world is obviously relevant
to an age when Indians have spread
around the world. Um and you know Mo
Modi has I think very explicitly talked
about the Indian diaspora as kind of a
mode of Indian national influence. But
let's just talk about the diaspora.
>> Yeah.
>> Let's talk about America. You mentioned,
you know, in the United States, [snorts]
relations have been better than than
ever up until very recently. Trump, in
particular, spent a lot of time courting
Indian-American voters. He did an event
with Modi in 2019, right? Howdy Modi in
in Texas. Just an amazing name. Um, but
then in the second Trump term, there's
been a swing. And it isn't just a swing
where Trump is imposing tariffs on
Europe. It's also a swing where there is
this kind of anti-Indian backlash on on
the right. So both tell me where you
think that comes from but also just talk
about how how do you think Americans see
India or see Indians I think is the
better way to put it.
>> By the way don't forget that Modi had
this one of the biggest rallies right
next door Madison Square Gardens. Uh so
so
>> not just no no it's New York as well as
Texas all the all the centers. Yeah. So
I think generally Modi has uh used that
uh as a foreign policy tool in partly
it's genuine but partly also it's a it's
a significant foreign policy asset. Um
so uh how about the American perception
of India? First of all Americans don't
know much about India. Um and I'm I'm
sorry to say this but it's not so India
doesn't strike American imagination the
way the Chinese do. Uh and also in some
ways actually the Soviet Union did
because it was a threat for a different
reason. There are many more um you know
universities with centers for China
studies. Uh Americans going to study in
China getting trained in the language.
This is goes back to the cold war
period. There's nothing like that. Uh as
a professor I can I can tell you that
India studies is a nothing comparable.
So American students and American
academic institutions and to some extent
think tanks too they're catching up now
but nothing like China um as you know
United States is not a country where uh
uh there's a lot of interest in foreign
cultures right um I can tell you that uh
um I have a I have a son who just
graduated from school uh and u they
studied about China about Europe Rome
Greece not much in India
Uh so
that's part of the problem. Americans
don't go to India's large numbers of
tourists. So because of that we have had
and uh this relative
ignorance about India, neglect
[clears throat] of India. We talk about
democracy but you know US and India
largest democracy in the world that's
like rhetoric. I mean it doesn't really
translate into endearment of India in
the American public imagination. Now you
do mention about the Indian diaspora
which is uh quite influential
politically although smaller than China
but uh more successful economically.
>> Well that's yeah and that's that's part
part of my perception about the the
place of India in the US is that there's
this way in which Indian immigrants
have been more successful at attaining
positions of elite influence and this is
most obvious maybe in Silicon Valley but
you can also see it um in US politics
and in both political parties right it's
VC Ramaswami and you know Usha Vance as
well as Indian-Americans in the
Democratic party
>> but there's sort of a a flipping back
and forth where you know at certain
moments Indian success drives a kind of
admiration where it's like this is you
know the successful minority but then
you have especially just in the last
couple years on the right a flip against
a sense of like Indian-Americans
you know, there's abuse of H-1B visas,
people sort of forming ethnic mafias
inside Silicon Valley, that kind of
narrative takes hold. Um, how do you how
do you see that?
>> I think it's a real problem and it's
partly uh well, I'm not going to fault
anybody, but partly the way the Indian
diaspora, especially the tech elite in
US conducts itself. I have heard uh this
story about uh Indian dominance of
Silicon Valley uh as as a factor why
many uh non-Indians especially from
Southeast Asia have left Silicon Valley.
uh so I think uh maybe they don't
realize it but uh that perception
remains and also uh maybe getting into
some controversial issues here but H-1B
visa when it's partly the how American
companies recruited them you have what
60% until recently of H1B visas this is
obviously creates a perception
>> 60% of them were for India for for
Indians I mean that's a huge number uh
and even though they're all qualified
that number when it gets into uh the
public domain people uh people probably
did not know about it now it's out in
the open they think why should any
particular min ethnic group have
dominated I mean hugely disproportionate
share of the visas so this was partly a
kind of expected reaction especially at
a time when populism is growing in the
US you have the base people are thinking
that uh I mean I can tell you that the
Indian diaspora that gets H1B visa is
not taking any jobs from the kind of uh
support base of President Trump. Uh I
think these are completely different
levels of uh uh skill and uh but
certainly it creates the perception of
uh one ethnic group benefiting from uh
the American larger at the expense of
Americans. uh and I think there it can
be addressed and I think maybe some
reform there could be useful. Uh there
are other ways for Indians to come in. I
mean not all Indians initially when they
came to the US came on H1B visa. People
forget that narrative. Everything
focuses on the Silicon Valley H1B. I
think the main thing is that the
political climate in the US has narrowed
uh populism. There's an overall
anti-immigrant sentiment. I mean a few
years ago when the during the covid it
was the Chinese uh the Chinese brought
COVID into uh the US and now Indians are
taking jobs away from Americans. So this
is very political.
>> Do you think that there is a kind of
natural political or ideological
direction that the Indian diaspora in
the US takes you know historically
Indian-Americans I think have tended to
vote for the Democrats like most
immigrant groups. The Trump
administration definitely courted them.
You have prominent Indian-American
Republicans. But
>> where, you know, if you were if you were
placing a bet on the political direction
of the Indian-American community, what
would you
>> Okay, without going into specific
numbers here, but I can only talk about
my my own observation. I think I've seen
uh very successful
um
Democrats who are of Indian origin and
very successful Republicans of Indian
origin. But what actually strikes me I
have seen more Indian-Americans or
Americans of Indian origin meaning they
might have been born in United States
but they have ethnically Indian they
have become more conservative.
>> Why? If you want me to speculate, I
think I would say that uh
>> you know, it's always a bit easier to uh
because American [clears throat] public
has turned ex except in the liberal
eastern states and and California. If
you're living in the deep south and
there's a lot of Indians there, it's you
know, you feel more at home identifying
with the Republican narrative, the
conservative narrative. And also uh for
all politicians in the US uh being
hardline conservative uh saying uh you
know very uh like anti-immigrant things
identifying with a very conservative
agenda probably is gets you more
assimilated.
>> No I well and I think your point about
assimilation is well taken. I think
people, liberals and progressives,
sometimes underestimate how embracing a
certain kind of nationalism as an
outsider can be a way to assimilate,
right? Um, which is why it's not always
the case that immigrants or minorities
are just sort of natural liberals. Um,
is the Europe the European landscape
does that look different? So, in the UK,
right, you have a lot of Indians in
elite roles now that Europe is opening
further. Or do you see the Indian
diaspora playing a big role in the
European landscape that how does it look
different from the US?
>> Well, the European Europe is a much more
older society, right? It's a much older
civilization than United States. United
States still is a migrant community and
you know uh with due respect to the
native Americans uh it's it's a new uh
new society. So it has doesn't have the
same traditions, religions and same
monuments. for example uh that you can
go back and say oh this is the you know
Christian emperor so and so did uh so so
that's why US provides much more of a
broad space for adaptation and
assimilation so it is in in a sense
immigrant society and very being
[clears throat] American means being
everything a little bit of everything
Europe is still very traditional in that
sense so I think United States unless
there is a social revolution here and a
revival of Christianity rate again in in
US the Indian community in the US will
also become more open-minded and more
assimilated the way uh American society
generally is uh but it will be certainly
not be able to do the same thing uh in
Europe possibly with possible exception
of Britain where as you know um you know
uh there's a large Indian community but
there's also a large Pakistani community
>> well well right I mean so part of what's
fascinating to me about the European
deal and sort of is that one
Europe needs people more than the US
does. Europe is older, lower birth
rates, right? There's more there's more
of a need for immigrants in Europe than
in the US. Europe has had a very
difficult experience assimilating
immigrants from the Middle East and
North Africa. And you have much starker
conflicts in Europe between native
populations and Muslim immigrants. And
so now it's like Europe is saying, well,
we're going to we're going to take a lot
more immigrants from India. And so
you're you're creating it seems like a
kind of fascinating almost triangle
there, right, between native
populations,
Muslim immigrants,
you know, Middle East, North Africa, and
then potentially Indian immigrants as
well. That just seems like a very
potentially volatile mix. [gasps]
>> I'm a little more optimistic. First of
all, Europe cannot compete with uh
Australia, Canada, uh uh or United
States. I lived
>> as as potential destinations than
Indians want to go to.
>> Much harder to it takes much longer,
much harder. I I lived in Britain. Uh
walked there. Uh I got an H-1B visa and
then get one of those genius visas uh to
settle here. much easier to until now
okay Europe also has not only social
resistance to immigration and that's not
just Muslims to some extent for anybody
come from outside they want to preserve
their own culture and heritage a lot
more because they see themselves as a
very traditional society much longer
than say the United States going back
and also um you have to also look at the
supply side um maybe Indians still think
of the United States and also the Canada
uh as uh you know like a more of an
opportunity. There are much more
opportunities here. Uh this might all
change but there are much more
opportunities for them to uh they still
talk about the American dream despite
what has happened in the last uh last
year or so. So I don't think Europe can
compete uh even the UK also
>> even but even with even if the Indian
government feels like it has a really
strong interest in encouraging
immigration to Europe. This has been
offered to me as one of the one of the
solutions to uh the unemployment
problems you mentioned that like maybe
you know the Modi government or Indian
governments might say well you know we
have a lot of unemployed young men and
it wouldn't be the worst thing if they
went and worked in Europe they might
think of that but this will be heavily
uh registered because they will see that
is passing the buck basically to to
Europe so the challenge for the Modi
government is to create more
opportunities and bring the diaspora
back to India and some extent people are
now talking about whether the H-1B visa
crisis many of the Indians are going
back and I've seen this in social media
talks that there's you know maybe time
to go back home so for these people
maybe easier to get jobs because they
are already well trained but what about
the rural Indians that are looking for
jobs I think we have to expand the
economy and that's the challenge so if
uh any government whether Modi or a
successor government tries to export its
problem to Europe
that is not going to succeed because
most Indians uh they will keep a foot on
both sides. They will keep a foot in
India and they keep a foot in in the
immigrant country. But I think given a
chance to come back and have a good um
reasonably good life in India, they'll
come back to India.
>> What does India want from its diaspora?
>> Get money.
>> Uh yeah, it's a big export uh for for
India. uh but also want loyalty. Uh
loyalty meaning always think of the
Indian interests. Uh India has
facilitated uh in some ways by allowing
people with Indian connections born in
India to go back and live in India. So
so India definitely wants them. Uh
>> does India want when does India want its
diaspora to make Europe or the United
States or any other democratic country
more sympathetic to India? Oh yeah. Um
um that's definitely the policy of the
current government. Yes. Uh there's
absolutely no question about but you
have to say why not why can't you do
that? We have examples of the Jewish
diaspora uh supporting Israel. We have
example Irish uh
>> again I'm I'm I'm not I'm not offering
this as criticism. I'm offering it in
terms of an understanding of the future.
>> But that that may not be what I can say
that that's true but it's not the only
reason. the economic financial side is
very important and secondly it comes and
goes with who is in power. uh I didn't
see it uh that strongly. In fact, I have
seen former Indian leaders going to
Africa and other places say you should
identify with aspirations of your own
country. Uh so people like Nehu uh to
counter that kind of you know immigrant
nationalism pro Indian nationalism in
other countries because they know that
this will create tensions and this will
also become an anti-India thing like
what happened in Uganda for example when
Indians were expelled. uh so I think we
there will be a limit but I think
currently uh it is an instrument of uh
foreign policy
>> pull up to to close it's60
>> everything has gone as well for India as
could be imagined in that time how would
you describe the Indian place in the
world in that future
>> if everything goes well I think India
would be I still think it'll be the
third largest economy and not the top
economy there have been some studies put
India as the number one economy
overtaking the United States and China
but the gap between India and China will
be less uh much less and possibly gap
between you know uh India and the United
States will be much less and India's
main problem is not uh human resources
or lack of talent is the domestic
politics uh you know India has serious
domestic fractures uh frictions so so
you I would worry a bit about India's
continuing
as kind of a united integrated country.
I am optimistic it will but we cannot
take it for granted. But if India does
that it will be one of the most
respected powers in the world. I mean I
would not only have hard power but also
a lot of soft power. I think that's the
that's the very optimistic scenarios.
The pessimistic scenario will be
domestic breakdown in India turning very
nationalistic war with Pakistan that
kind of damages both the countries very
seriously. uh and and also uh China. So
I would I'm an optimist and I think
India has the resources the uh sort of
population base and and the human
talent. I think generally it will be
very beneficial. India will not be a
divisive country in world order. I can
tell you that uh I don't see that at the
very among as far as diaspora is
concerned. They want to mix with people.
They want to make a contri contribution.
They want to be recognized. They want to
get respect. So I think there will be a
very very unifying force even for the
west. I'll be an asset to the west. If
that sounds too optimistic, maybe I am
an optimist.
>> That's a good place to end. [music]
Abavachara, thank you so much for
joining.
>> Thank you very much for
Heat. Heat. N. [music]
>> [music]